So, very well, welcome to everyone for this session of the Proteus Seminar Series.
We have today two speakers.
I'm very pleased to introduce you, Olympia Lombardi and Christian Lobetz.
Today, we'll be talking about a topic that is, of course, close to the art of the project,
the cosmological geometric approach to the era of time.
So, Olympia and Christian, thank you very much for being here and I leave it to you.
Okay, first of all, thank you, Silvia, for inviting us.
Thank you, everyone, for being here, at least, virtually.
On my behalf, and I think Olympia's behalf is really a pleasure for us to discuss our ideas and projects with you.
So, second, this presentation that we'd like to discuss with you all is based on a project
that now we are running in our group in Argentina, founded by the John Timothy Foundation.
So, we just started this project.
It's about the era of time and the era of time in a cosmological model, in a cosmological context.
So, now, what we are going to present is some ideas that we have in order to develop our project.
Some of these ideas were already published by Olympia and Castagnino.
That was a former collaborator of Olympia.
But now the idea is to develop this approach further to fix what needs to be fixed and to expand it as we can.
And that's why it would be very, very useful for us to have your feedback, your criticism, your objection,
everything that you want to say about what we are going to discuss would be very helpful for us because it's part of the project that we are running now.
So, let's get started with this.
Well, the title is the one that Silvia already said.
Our starting point is the following.
We want to defend the following simple claim.
We live in a universe without direction of time, right?
This direction of time, we will claim is primitive and holds for the entire universe.
This is the first simple claim that we are going to defend.
And the proposal will basically be that the era of time is an intrinsic geometrical feature of space time.
For us, and the idea that we have in mind is that just happens that our universe comes equipped with an hour of time.
Our universe just meets the right sort of structure to support an hour of time.
This is the goal of our project. We want to develop a philosophical approach to the era of time that meets these simple and, I think, strong claims about the era of time in physics.
Now, we have to give some introduction about the discussion of the era of time that is already a bit messy, and then we are going to develop our approach.
So this is roughly the map of the talk.
First, I will try to formulate in a clear possible way what is the problem of the era of time.
This is already a problem because different people understand the problem differently,
and it's not easy to find a common ground to discuss the topic.
So I would try to make some effort to lay this basis of understanding.
Second, I would just briefly discuss some general approaches like the difference between global and local era of time,
why we like to go with a global era of time, and then discuss two different philosophical approaches like the reductionist approach and the primitive approach,
and why we will support a primitive approach to the era of time, and then the basics of our project.
This is the last part and the substantial part, and where we would like to hear your feedback and comments.
So let's go to the first point.
As I said before, I mean, it's already problematic to define what is really the problem of the era of time.
Almost 50 years ago, John Irma already learned about this issue, saying that it seems not a very great exaggeration to say that the main problem with the problem of the direction of time
is to figure out exactly what the problem is or is supposed to be.
And when one is running through the literature of the era of time, it's quite evident that people usually discuss different topics under the same level.
And okay, so these are already a problem.
So to show these differences, let's say that, for example, some people think that the era of time is mainly about the nature of entropy increases processes, or irreversible processes.
This, for example, Rechenbach's branching system, or for example, Albert, David Albert, and Barry Lowers' mentaculous approach.
They think that the nature of the era of time must be somehow given by explaining the nature of entropy increasing processes.
So when we are discussing the era of time, we are also discussing the nature of entropy increasing processes.
Some other people think that, more or less in the same line, that the real issue with the era of time is the problem of time reversal and invariant loss.
For example, in this case, Paul Orwell, in a famous book in the 1980s and 70s, he rejects that there is an era of time in our universe because the underlying laws are time-reversed and invariant.
Then other people think that there is an era of time in our world because the violation of CPT in weak interactions with one people theory, for example, the decay of chaos or may some bees or whatever.
But again, I mean, some people think that it's about entropy increasing behavior, other people think that it's the enterprise to find non-time reversal and invariant loss.
And the discussion is not exactly the same. They could be somehow related to each other, but it's not exactly the same, but again, it's adding more complexity in the discussion.
Other people think that the discussion about the era of time is mainly about the relation between thermodynamics and the underlying classical mechanics.
This is probably the orthodox approach is related to the first point I mentioned just before, but the main issue is to try to figure out how can we explain
the evident time asymmetry of, for example, entropy-increasing processes, but could be also other asymmetric processes if the underlying physics, in this case the underlying classical mechanics, is time-reversed and invariant.
And this is the discussion, this is the orthodox view in the era of time, how usually the problem is posed in many textbooks or many papers or in many approaches to the era of time.
For example, this has an origin in the paradox, for example, and Walshman replied to the paradox and so on and so forth.
But again, everything is related. Now we have, again, time reversal and invariant loss, also thermodynamics, but now it's the relation between these two concepts.
So again, this adding more complexity to the discussion, but also it's not quite the same discussion, but everything is discussed under the label of the era of time.
Other people have posed the problem now in terms of finding special conditions or postulating special conditions at the beginning of the universe, for example.
This is, for example, the Walshman replied to lots of products with this one asymmetry model, but also it's the Albert idea with the past hypothesis.
So the solution of the problem of the era of time is to try to find if we can obtain some particular asymmetry between initial and final conditions.
For example, this is the road that the past hypothesis has played in the discussion.
Now if we move on to the cosmological model, and again, now the problem usually is accounted for in terms of whether there is an asymmetry between initial and final condition of the universe as a whole.
And then we have some bunch of different models like Gold's universe, where there are initial and final conditions that are symmetric, therefore there would not be an era of time, or Penrose Big Banner being correct model, where there is an asymmetry between initial and final condition, therefore we can define an era of time in terms of this asymmetry.
Or Gold's universe with non-objective temporal lapses, so close temporal curves, therefore no era of time.
Again, everything is discussed under the same label, the era of time, but the particular aspect of these issues are different and demands different approaches.
But again, the problem seems to be everything, all of this, but nothing particularly related to this particular, with any of these issues.
So, we can just put all these approaches aside and start to think the problem all over again from the beginning, from a more philosophical, maybe a more philosophical approach.
We can say, well, I mean, at the end, the question is about whether time has a direction, according to our physics, if we want to defend a more physicalist or a naturalist approach to era of time.
So, we can think that the enterprise to solve the problem of era of time is to find a substantial difference between different sort of temporal theories.
And this is very helpful to rely on McTaggart's formulation of different temporal structures.
If you remember, McTaggart proposes that there are three kind of temporal theories, the A series, the B series, and the C series, instantiating different structures.
But in these particular cases, when we are asking for the direction of time, we are asking whether time has, according to physics, a B structure.
A B structure is one in which we can define earlier than later than relationships.
So, then, okay, there is some discussion whether the A B, the A series is equal to the B series and this is inconsistent or not.
I will just put this aside, but the idea is try to check in our physical theories to see if they can capture some element in the theory that allows us to distinguish substantially between series going from A to C.
So, in this respect to the series going from C to A, for example.
So, I will post the problem in this particular way. It's not mainly related to entropy increasing behavior. It's not mainly related to an asymmetry between initial final conditions.
This just is a discussion that came that could come afterwards. The basic problem is, I think, is this one.
From here, we can start to build up different approaches or different strategies to check where the substantial difference really rely.
But so far, I mean, I think this is the more clear and pure way to start to think about the problem of the era of time.
So, having said that, let's now move on to the particular strategies to solve the problem.
The problem of finding this substantial difference between different sort of temporal relationships.
To begin, I think that we can have two different general strategies.
Some are more philosophy inclined approaches and other would be more physics based approaches.
I can have this puzzle of era of time, and I can think that the solution of this issue relies on analyzing conceptually,
analyzing how our concepts try to capture the idea of time, the idea of direction, or wherever. Or I can rely on how we experience time and how our concepts try to capture this experience of time.
And then I can argue that the era of time is based on these commitments, for example, to change this commitment to respect with our experience of time, and so on and so forth.
This is what I call a philosophy inclined approach.
In the sense that we don't need physics to figure out whether there is an era of time we need to look into our concepts into our language into our experience, and then we can derive who can extract the era of time from there.
Physics based approaches obviously take a different strategy in this sense, because there is the assumption that there of time is somehow a property of the physical world that a physical theory can or maybe cannot but in principle we would like to, to our theory to capture this property of the world.
Or probably it's a theoretical requirement in order to formulate our theories to be empirically adequate, for example, we need to postulate an era of time because otherwise our theory wouldn't be empirical adequate.
But I think that this is our two different strategies I think that both of them are equally valid at some point but it depends on our philosophical tastes, our philosophical gaps in some sense.
But to give you a better, better impression of what I'm referring to. For example, if we think of Mac Tiger's argument or something like this, to reject an era of time is a clear example of a philosophy inclined approach to time, in particular to time direction.
And say that, well, according to Mac Tiger, if we analyze carefully this structure, this temporal structure, and then we, we for some reason, come to the conclusion that time should instantiate, instantiate a C structure.
Therefore, there is no era of time, because there is no passage of time, there is no way to define earlier or later, later relationships between different events.
This is for example, one way in which we can conceptually just get rid of the era of time from our metaphysics from our ontology.
Again, there's no physics here, physics is just silent and don't, doesn't play a relevant role in our understanding of era of time in our understanding of time in general.
We can also, for example, support an era of time because our way of understanding change. For example, if we hold, if we hold a sort of like initial relational, relationalism, we can deduce that there is, or there must be an era of time, if there is something like change.
This is how Leibniz understood the nature of change in terms of something that is intrinsically directed. So if it's intrinsically directed in order to differentiate time from space, then we require that the world, if relationalism is true,
well, probably it could be also temporary directed. I mean, we can obviously discuss and go around this idea, but my first, my main aim is try to give you a possible approach to the era of time that
doesn't need physics to figure out the problem to formulate the problem and to offer a solution to the problem.
Obviously, this talk will be focused on the physics-based approaches in the sense that, in the sense that I mentioned before, that we believe that it's not enough to conceptually analyze our language, to conceptually analyze our metaphysics,
to draw a direction of time, we need to look into our physical theories, we need to look into the way in which we formulate our theories, and then try to see if we can find a way to get an era of time.
And now we have this distinction between, for example, local or global era of time. This is probably one of, well, it could be, but probably it's one of the main distinction, and the distinction is mainly about this.
Whether we have an era of time that holds locally, there is in some regions of space times, in a probably directionless universe, or we have an era of time that holds for an entire universe.
On the first side, for example, is Boltzmann approach to the era of time, because he thought that globally the universe was in a thermal equilibrium, so there was no era of time in the universe as a whole, but in some regions for
the state of fluctuation, the entropy went down, and then start to went up again, and in this particular region we can define an era of time, if we understand that the era of time is related to entropy increasing processes.
The idea is that the era of time is not something that holds for an entire universe, just for some special regions that meet the right sort of requirement to define an era of time, for example, regions in which the entropy increased.
Global, people that think that the era of time is global, well, obviously think that this is not the case, that the era of time holds for an entire universe, so it doesn't matter where and when you are, there will be an era of time anywhere, in any way.
For example, the Penrose Big Bang Big Crunch approach is a kind of global era of time, since that from the Big Bang on, there is an era of time everywhere.
And then we have a second difference.
One can either be a reductionist about the era of time, or one can be a primitive is about the era of time. This is two different sides in discussion.
For the reductionist, the temporal features, there is any temporal relation that we can find in our experience or in our language or whatever, must be reduced to some non temporal features.
For example, some asymmetry in the material happening in the world, for example, entropy increases processes again, but also could be cosmic radiation, or any asymmetry that you can come to find in our physical theories or in the world.
But the idea is the first one, temporal relationship can be reduced to non temporal relationship.
For the primitive approaches, well, the situation is quite different because the starting point is different. The reduction shouldn't be guaranteed from the beginning, but we should start with the idea that temporal features cannot be reduced to anything else.
So any temporal relationships are somehow primitive, primitive in our ontology, in our metaphysics, and the direction of time would be an intrinsic property of time.
So any temporal relation should be explained, should be detailed further in terms of temporal notion, because there is no way to reduce temporal relations or temporal features to non temporal features.
This is just obviously a situation that is pervading in the philosophy in general, but in the particular case of the era of time, we can find these two approaches.
To give you a better impression of the reductions approach, probably Reichenbach's definition of era of time is one of the most popular that was kind of orthodoxy, at least in the main points in the discussion.
Because but for Reichenbach, the direction of time is the direction in which entropy increases. It's a definition like he says. So as it is definition, what is reducing any temporal feature to a non temporal feature.
Once again, this non temporal feature for Reichenbach is the direction in which entropy increases in most thermo thermo dynamical processes in a selective system, and so on and so forth.
So, their argument for the underlying argument for this approach is something like this. We start with our intuitive understanding of time.
So we think that time passes by that flows, blah, blah.
So we can define some temporal relationships between different events. A comes always earlier than B and B always comes later than A and we can just add more events to this structure and get sort of linearity going from one point to the other but never the other way around.
So we can define all this in our intuitive understanding of the world.
Then the approaches suggest that something like this. Now, to explain this, this, this temporality, this directionality of time, reduce time to some physical material asymmetry in the world, something that in the world exhibits our asymmetric behavior.
And entropy was a very good candidate for this. So this is why the majority of approaches try to reduce at least at the beginning of the 20th century and the end of the 19th century, reduce temporality and the direction of time to entropy,
because it was the right sort of thing that could exhibit the right sort of asymmetry to capture something like time.
So then we can define some relationships in terms of this material asymmetry that could be physically correlated, like Sklar says, with the temporal relationships.
So, so, so far so good. I mean, we have most of the job done for the reductionist approach.
But then we, I mean, but then there, there were some additional problems, because we start with a temporal structure that we want to reduce to a non temporal structure, but then this non temporal structure was reduced to a structure that is classical mechanics that happens to be completely
blind to the direction of time.
So,
we have this evident temporal asymmetries in the world, we find some material asymmetry, but it happened that this material asymmetry was described was in turn reduced to a symmetric structure, like for example classical mechanics with its time reversal invariant loss.
And then this was the, the, the main, the main problem for the reductionist approach. How may irreversibly processes or estimate or temporarily asymmetric processes be temporarily direct to be temporary asymmetric if they reduce to a temporarily symmetric mechanical process at the end.
So if we believe that thermodynamics somehow reduces to classical mechanics.
And then we read, we think that the direction of time is given by thermo dynamic thermo dynamics processes. Then we have this problem because at the end, we have an instructor that reduce everything that is no longer time asymmetric.
So, the problem was trying to figure out what how we can solve this issue. This is the, the, the orthodox view.
How, how the problems usually approaches, try to, to find a reconciliation for this opposing words, the, the, the microscopic and temporarily asymmetric work and the microscopic and temporarily symmetric work.
So, this is the more or less run roughly the orthodox view of their time.
But if there is an orthodoxy there should be also an heresy. And the heresy came with john earman and the time direction heresy.
Let me quote him in full because I mean it's very clear what is the intention but it's the aim of this heresy.
It's that if there is a temporary orientation, if there is an hour of time, then the hour of time or temporary orientation is an intrinsic feature of space time, which doesn't need to be a cannot be reduced to non temporal features.
So, I believe that existence of temporary orientation doesn't hinge as crucially on reversibility as the reductionist would have us believe.
Now, this, this, this heretic approach is put in the discussion upside down in the, in the sense that there is no need to find a temporary asymmetry to reduce the, the, the, the, sorry, there is no need to find a material symmetry to reduce the temporal asymmetry that we find the
or we have to look for the temporal asymmetry, as it could be built in the theories in a non reductionist way, we have to look for an intrinsic feature of space time, as it's formulated in our best physical theory and try to find their
there is a hour of time or not, but the project of finding a reduction is just hopeless and or it just misses, misses the, the, the point as Irmán says.
Also, other philosophers have, have followed this, this view, for example, can modeling also, even though the model teams is not so clear as Irmán was about the direction of time about how to build this structure.
He also believes that the, the, the time on the passage of time and the direction of time is somehow intrinsic in the structure of the space time is somehow built in the structure of the space time.
So we have to find this, this feature and the I'm trying to, to show how this feature can be defined theoretically and in, in, in, in, in, in terms of our best physical theories.
This is a rough and very superficial presentation of the difference view could be obviously discussed and probably there are many, many others but the idea to frame our, I mean, for framing our, our project, I think this is enough, because what we are going to try to explore in our project is another
time that meets the, the, the following properties.
First, that the era of time is a global feature of the universe I mean it's really something that holds for the entire universe as a whole.
So we are not localist about the era of time, we don't think that the era of time can be just defined in, in, in regions of space time and that in different regions, the, the direction of time could be the opposite.
What we like to, to get is a global era of time that it doesn't matter where you are, and when you are there of time is always pointing to toward the same direction.
But also we, we, we like to have a view that is not reductionist that it doesn't hinge upon a non entropy increasing processes cosmic radiation or any material or any asymmetric matter in the world.
What we like is to have a primitive era of time that is not reduced to anything else, but it's an intrinsic feature of space time, following a year months time direction heresy first.
And then when we start to look into the possible features that could play the, this role, this role to be primitive for a direction of time.
We are going to focus on geometric features of the space time, because if the, if the era of time is a intrinsic feature of the space time.
But this feature are geometric in nature, so the geometry of space time should show us whether there is a direction of time or not.
And this is the, the, the main points of our project.
And then some further basics.
Let me go in this way.
So, we think that the best theoretical field to define this sort of time is the theory that talk about space time, talk about time in some sense even in a bigger structure but take time as an object of study.
So this is generativity, but generativity is quite wide so it's quite variety are many different models so it, our, our, our theoretical field has two sides.
First, generativity as a theoretical framework but also the different cosmological models that constraints.
And then to describe how our universe.
Sorry, what are the features of our universe in particular, and not all the possible universe that we can find within generativity.
In the sense, the, this, this theoretical framework this generativity plus our best cosmological model, we hope that it, they will give us the geometrical structure that we need to define an era of time.
But also, our, our, our proposal is, in some sense, modally, modally weak in the sense that the era of time would be just a contingent feature of our universe.
For our universe, but not for other universe compatible with generativity or partially with our cosmological model. It just happened that our universe meets the right sort of requirements to have an era of time, but the theory, the physical
physics in general is also compatible with universes with without any era of time, and this is perfect fine with us I mean, and we are aware that we don't want something that the era of time isn't necessary, that it couldn't happen that
a space time doesn't have an era of time, we are fine with the idea that could be that there are some space times or universe universes without our time, but it happens that our universe does have an era of time.
And this is fine for us because we want to explain the era of time in our universe. If you compare this with, for example, other approaches that are stronger, for example, those relying on a non-time reversal invariant laws, they usually try to say that the era of time is
necessary, according to the theory. In every model of the theory, there wouldn't be an era of time, we are not going that far, we are just
modally more moderate in this sense.
So what we basically need is first to figure out the geometrical constraints on features that any space time should meet in order for it to score a global era of time.
We're going to start with a pristine space time and then to think what kind of structure this space time needs in order to have defined an era of time. This is what the first thing we need.
The second thing that we need is take a look at our best cosmological models and see and check if, according to these models, our space time meets those geometrical requirements, those geometrical features.
So we are balancing, I mean, we will balance our approach, keeping an eye on both sources of theoretical information, of theoretical resources to defend this project as an idea of a primitive, geometrical, and global era of time.
I already said that. And basically, the condition of this is what Olympia and Castagnino were working on some time ago is that the geometrical conditions seems to be something like this.
Some are geometrical requirements that constrain the possible structures that an space time could have. And also there are others requirements that come more from physics or from empirical observation that just narrowed down the different possibilities that we can find in generativity and different models.
But this is a general map of what we need to investigate. We need to establish for for defending strong viewpoint about the era of time.
So let me go run through with these requirements, just to give you an impression of what we are going to do in the following years, if everything goes right.
So that the first requirement.
So we start with a pristine space time.
So the first thing that we can ask.
The definition of space time to have in order to define an era of time afterwards is that this era of time be sorry this space time be temporal, temporarily orientable.
Temporal rentability is this one space time. There is some manifold with some topology plus metric is time orientable if there exists a continuous non vanishing vector field on the variety with which is everywhere non space like to give a picture of what this
means that the space time should be such that it doesn't look like a for example a Moebius band or it doesn't have some temporal temporarily close close course for example.
The things that you can move along the you can move your vector field along the variety, but it's always pointing toward the same direction, and never you get the the vector field pointing toward the opposite direction.
You start with, this is basically the idea that temporal temporal orientability, try to geometrically capture, and this is quite, quite, quite, quite intuitive why we want this in our in our space time in order to define an era of time.
Otherwise, there are times should be the era of time could be pointing towards some direction in some at some points in the variety but in the opposite direction.
In other, at other points in the variety, and then there of time wouldn't be global because it would be pointing toward different direction, depending on where and when we are in the space time.
There should be a reasonable requirements and in our in our space time for having a arrow of time.
I already said this that the second and the third condition are more or less quite related each other.
I think that Olympia would say something about this because they with Castanillo they were working.
Particularly about this, if we can do it without any of these requirements but for now that the second thing that we can we can ask our, our space time to have is some global time function.
guarantees that the space time is globally speedable into hypersurface of simultaneity.
This, in turn, defines a fallation of the space time, a consistent fallation of space time.
So in order to achieve this what they discussed the kind of thing that they need to to discard, but the idea is that we should be able to split our space time in such a way that the global time function always increase monotonically.
This is the, the, the, the definition of this global time function.
So this is the second requirement that we asked our space time to meet.
And what this yields is a single time ordering for any event of the universe.
As I said before, the value of this of any of the events increases along every future directed non space like curve.
One could ask and then we can discuss if this is really necessary or not that the space time also has cosmic time. So we need temporal or instability and then a global time function and also we can ask cosmic time.
This is the definition of the cosmic time.
But what basically this means is that give some physical meaning to the global time function. What was before was much more formal requirement in order to split the space time.
But now this cosmic this big cosmic time seems to guarantee that all the processes can be coordinated by a single time, like, simulating the idea that we have a parameter of the pollution of the universe.
Then, as I said before, I think that Olympia Castagnino revised the necessity of this third requirement, probably in the discussion.
In the discussion, we can, we can analyze this but this is one of the general, just the general idea of the sort of thing that we can require our spare our space time to meet.
So,
taking stock of this.
We started with a pristine space time, we require temporal or instability, then we require a global time function, and then we require cosmic time.
And all these conditions, plus some details that we can discuss afterwards, provide the geometrical condition in order for the space time to have the right sort of the structure to define a temporal orientation.
What we are looking for is how in this geometric basis in a space time that meets this requirement, we can define a temporary orientation because so far we only have the structure, but we don't have yet the temporary orientation that plays the role of an hour of time in a
geometrical structure like this space.
So now we have to find the way to define or at least to be clear about what a temporal orientation amounts to.
And these are two a bit cryptic definition of temporal orientation of time orientation.
But,
well, I mean, I don't, I don't know if I have time but probably it's better to have the, the, the intuitive view.
Because these two definition of temporal orientation is in terms of a, a, of a different morphism that leads fix the hypersurface is blah blah blah all these try to translate into the idea that
in a space time with a temporal orientation, we have an underlying geometrical structure that doesn't look the same in both temporal or in temporal direction, we can have a
temporarily orientable space time with a global time function, also with a cosmic cosmic time, but still this structure could be symmetric with respect to the, to the, to both direction in the space time.
We need to break this symmetry by imposing that the space time could be a symmetric in the sense that it looks different, geometrically different in the future to pass direction with respect to the past to future direction.
If I am in at any place at any time point in the variety when I see toward the future I would see a different structure than it would see in the, in the past direction.
And basically what a time, the notion of time orientation, try to capture, and it's the same concept that they are of time, try to capture the Olympia, Olympia's examples is, if we look at an arrow and analyze it geometrically.
Obviously the, the, the direction from one extreme to the other are different, it's not the same to look at the, at the, at the arrow from the tail to the, to the top that from the top to the tail because there are objects that geometrically look different,
depending on, on where we are on, on, on, on the, on the object. So we can think of, of our universe in the sense, even though we have all these geometrical requirements met in our, in our, in our, in our space time.
We now require that it looks different into in the, in the two temporal direction. And this is the notion that temporary orientation trying to recover. So we need to define to find a way to say that this is this, our universe has a temporal orientation.
What a temporary orientation allows us to do.
Basically, it, it allows us to, to pick a direction in our vector field that is non arbitrary.
So, we can define now that the time orientation in this particular way, if a space time is time orientable also have a cosmic time or a global time function.
And a continuous non branching is not a space like vector field, blah, blah, this is what time orientable time orientability means, but the idea is that the choice of one of the fields, the plus and the minus vector field is substantially different, because they are pointing toward
different, toward different structure of the space time, the, the, the, in this case, the, the red vector field pointing conventionally toward the past is seen a geometrical structure of the space time that is different from wheat from the structure that the blue vector field is seen when
conventionally we define that is pointing toward the future, the, the, the word future and past are conventional, but they are based on a substantial difference, because they are pointing toward different haps of the space time that looks different from one point or the other.
And this is what allows us to pick a temporary image to say that, well, the vector field with plus the blue vector fields in is pointing conventionally toward the, the, the, the future, but what is what matters here is that
it is substantially different to the vector fields to the minus vector field pointing toward toward the opposite direction, and it's seen a different sort of structure for the space time.
What allows us to, to make this choice in a non arbitrary way at what doesn't allow us to swap the vector fields is this geometrical structure of the space test that the space time happens to have an asymmetry.
And what allows us to, to then pick one of the, one of these vector fields and say, well, we say that this pointing toward the future and this one is pointing toward the past.
So,
the, the, the whole. Yeah, the trick is, is more or less the following.
I am at one point in the space time.
And, and I have this vector fields, I have, I am in this like con structure, and I have some vector fields that are positive and some of the field that are commercially defined as negative.
And if I need to say what's the future direction of time and which is the past direction of time. If I have this underlying geometrical structure, I can easily pick one of these and say that is pointing toward the future because it's pointing one in a direction that looks geometrically
with a different difference with respect to the opposite direction. And this is the, the, the conceptual, the conceptual, and also the geometric basis for defining another time in any situation in which we, we, we can be
this, this is the geometrical extension and the substantial extension between different vector fields for example.
Christian, sorry if I interrupt you, but I would like to remind you that it's not that you are running out of time of course we have time for, for, but we would like also to have time for the discussion.
Yeah, no, I, you can wrap up at some point.
Yeah, I am almost done.
Thank you. Thank you.
Sorry, sorry.
Well, I think that this is more or less clear what is the, the, the idea underlying.
So, okay, this is pretty obvious but we first impose some temporal or instability, then we say that, okay, the space time should have this, this geometrical structure.
And then we suppose a second structure that is cosmic time. And then we say, well, we need that is this space time also be a same asymmetric, and when it's time asymmetric we can define.
We can distinguish between this, for example, vector fields.
And then, well, if everything works well with this, then we can define a temporal orientation in the sense that I said before.
But now I mean, I think that I would like to just mention two problems. The problem that I don't know exactly how to figure out that probably you can you can help us or you can also point to different problems but it seemed to be a little bit fishy in our argument, how we can go from a
time asymmetric, sorry, time symmetric space time to a time asymmetric space time, something should play the role of transforming a symmetric space time into an asymmetric space time geometrically.
Some have proposed that non-time universal invariant loss could play this role or some fundamental material asymmetry in this, in the universe could play this role but it's not so clear for me, but I mean this step could be a little bit fishy.
But also, it's not clear what could happen in a universe with singularities, with black holes. This could be interpreted as a violation of time or instability, and if time or instability is violated, so there of time could be non-global.
And this would be a problem for our approach, so you would have to think further about, well, how can we hold this approach, even though our universe seemed to have some singularities, or our way to understand singularities so far is one in which time or
instability seemed to be violated. And of course, your worries, objections could fit here, please, so I think that that's all. Thank you for listening.
Okay, thank you. Thank you very much, Christian. Okay, so are there questions?
You can raise your hands.
I think, okay, Karl? Karl Hofer?
So, if I didn't miss something, what gives our universe contingently a direction of time is the fact that it starts in a big bang and doesn't end in a symmetric big crunch, is that right?
Sorry, I didn't hear the first part, because your microphone is a bit noisy.
If you can repeat the first part of the question, please.
Yeah, I was asking if the contingent intrinsic asymmetry that you're relying on is the feature of our universe that it starts in a big bang, but does not end in a symmetric big crunch.
Basically, you're pointing at the endless expansion of our universe as the feature which makes it possible.
Yeah, okay, I have a reply, but I think that Olympia has another reply, so probably Olympia could go first, and then I give you my reply.
If the universe is big bang, big chill or something like this is evident that this is symmetric, but even if you have a big bang, a big crunch universe, the symmetry is only regarding the radius of the universe,
but the distribution of matter and energy doesn't need to be all the fields in the universe that mean that there are very thin asymmetry geometrical asymmetries.
I mean, you don't have a symmetry, completely a symmetric universe. In fact, as always, complete symmetry, and we can show and we have shown in our papers, symmetry has zero measure in the space of all possible universes,
considering the big bang, big crunch, because the only, I mean, the only variable is, I mean, the radius of the universe is not, absolutely not the only variable of the universe.
You have many variables, and to make all these variables to be confabulated to make a big bang, big crunch, symmetric universe is has zero measure.
Okay, I'm waiting for Christian to tell me how he was going to answer.
Okay.
I mean, in some sense, I can see that the big, I mean, probably what I want to say is not the same that Olympia says probably we have some discussion with Olympia afterwards.
The point is that, yeah, the big bang a big crunch model could be one in which we have some asymmetry that could hold consistently along the unit, I mean, on the whole universe.
In any case, if you want to say that this asymmetry is primitive or is a
non reducible reducible feature of space time and set up time itself as symmetric, you need all this structure and to translate this asymmetry in geometrical in geometrical terms.
Because I mean, the, the, I think that the underlying idea in in Ehrman's heresy is that, okay, we can find some material asymmetry like the big bang or big crunch model.
But if this is really an hour of time, it needs to be somehow encoded into the space time structure and the way in which we can encode it there of time in a space time structure is by meeting all these constraints.
So, I think that conceptually, all this structure come first, and then the big bang big big crunch model could play the an additional role but you need all this conceptual background to define primitive or intrinsic hour of time in a universe is not enough with the big bang big crunch model.
I don't know if this is the right model, I don't know if this is the right but what I think is that it's not enough if we want to defend something more substantial or approach that thing that there of time is intrinsic or is encoded in the space time following the Ehrman heresy.
So, this is what my, my, my reply.
Okay, thanks. I have more questions but I see that Federico.
Yeah, well, if it's connected to this one, Carl, you can go ahead.
If it's like a follow up. No, okay, then Federico.
I will be brief because it's a, it's a follow up and then I will leave the others.
So yeah, it's a follow up on Christian answer.
So in general relativity, the structure of space time always depends on the distribution of matter.
How could you have, as you said, in a symmetry that belongs to time itself, so to speak, so I'm thinking about for example the sitter space time so do you have a symmetry in such empty universes or
does it not always depend on initial condition and distribution of matter in the end?
Yeah, I mean, I'm not completely sure about my answer but this would be something like following.
Obviously, there will be some models of some universe that can be drawn from general activity that wouldn't be an hour of time.
This could be empty universes or universes filled in some particular way but where the material is asymmetric.
Obviously what we need is an universe in which this geometrical asymmetry should be reflected in a material asymmetry.
But then what is playing the role of the fighting an hour of time is the geometrical asymmetry that is correlated.
I mean, obviously this could be philosophically discussed because some people could be that, okay, the geometry is primary and the material is secondary or it depends on which view of space time you have.
It's true that there would be some correlation between the distribution of energy and matter in the space time and the geometry of the space time because it's what general activity more or less says.
But the hour of time is encoded directly in the geometrical part but also reflected in the material part.
But then I think that probably we have to discuss, well, what's the nature of the space time, there is really two different things that are correlated or this only one.
And the other one is, you know, an idealization on the first one, or the way around that the material happening is just some emergent thing from space time that is certain type of the probably this is a very good discussion to to go on in our project but
what you say I think my first impression is that is true.
But again, what is playing the role of the given an intrinsic hour of time, an hour of time that is not reduced to anything else is that is itself encoded in the geometry in the geometry is the geometry of the space time so it's time in some sense.
It would be my answer I don't know if you are happy with that or or not.
I'm happy with all the talks.
That's fine. I mean, I think I will need to grasp a little bit more the technicality behind general relativity to formulate better my doubts.
Yeah, me too. But, but I mean, I'm thinking, because what what you said is interesting in the following sense is true that there exists this correlation and probably car can help us here because it's true that you have this correlation.
I mean, you, I mean, if you have, I don't know, super substantial metaphysics of space time, suppose, then what you are committed to something like all there is, all there isn't your ontology is a space time so probably what is the material
distribution is not metaphysically reliable as the space time itself that is what your ontology is made of in this sense, time is completely primitive you can define all this structure and it doesn't depend on the material happening on the on the material.
It doesn't depend on energy and matter distribution, because this is ontologically subsidiary of the, the system, the super sustainable space time.
I mean, probably the solution of this, of this question of the point that you have raised rely on relies on trying to explain where your metaphysical commitment with the space time.
What I have said is just an idea I didn't think through this idea through but probably someone you have something to say about this.
Thank you for your talk. It was very interesting. So, when you were introducing your project, you said, you said that you wanted the time and symmetry to be something geometric, including the geometry of space time.
And I thought, oh, well, if space time is what we have, you won't define an orientation and there is no problem with that.
And then in your slide about time or inability, you said, oh, but we want to have some criteria for this.
And then you draw this space time as a square and this space time as a triangle and say, oh, in this kind of space time, I can, I can have my, my, my orientation with some reason for this.
For me, it wasn't clear what was meant by this triangle and this we represent in this space time that was systematic. You said that the future looks kind of different, but can you made it some more precise.
Yeah.
Do you mean this idea that you are constraining your space time with some sort of structure that time or inability, then a global time function or a cosmic time, and then you have to go with
time asymmetric space time and this is the, the, the, the path from the square space time to the triangle space time you're referring to this, to this, to this path, right. Yeah, I mean,
the, the, the honest answer is, I don't know. I mean, I mean, this is the requirements, you say, okay, I believe that there is a matter of time I believe that this are of time is global, I believe that this are of time is intrinsic.
Then I have to go with generativity and try to see the cosmological model and define all these structures, say, well, this is very reasonable.
And our cosmological models suggest that, well, we live in a temporary, temporarily orientable space time blah blah, then we need a time asymmetrical space time geometrically, and then I have, I can define that the time or inability.
But then, yeah, the fishy step is, well, it seems reasonable to, to, to go from one from, from, from, to say that we have temporal orientability, blah blah, but this time asymmetry.
I'm not completely sure.
Yeah, the points that probably Olympia has something to say because she believes that there's an asymmetry.
I mean, I'm not, I will not pose this problem in terms of passing from something that is symmetric, symmetric to something that is non symmetric isometric, because, as I answered Carl, previously, symmetry is something very special.
Normally, you find asymmetry.
Symmetry has always in the space of all the solutions of something symmetry has always zero measure, measure, because it's very, very special.
So, this does not mean that the arrow of time is not is necessary, of course not, you need a lot of conditions, but even with these conditions, asymmetry is another condition, but now it's not a condition like the past type policies or the special initial
conditions. No, but because, because it is a very normal generic solution, the non generic solution is symmetry.
You have to pass from one to another, because it's something like thinking that normal, the normal thing is symmetry, and I have to explain asymmetry, and in probabilistic terms, the way is the other, the other direction.
Normally, you have asymmetry, symmetry is very special.
Right, right, but my, my first thing would be, of course, generic spaces in space times in general activity are asymmetric, that you have different things in different times and so on.
And you can choose an orientation for a space time, you can define your vector field, according to different criteria.
So, I don't know why would we choose one of these to be something special and make it and call it the arrow of time.
One of the directions.
Yeah, one of one of the directions. Yeah.
Because when we talk about the arrow of time, we are saying, as price insisted, we are using our anthropomorphic language, and we ought to think about future and past, and, but the fact is that the only thing we need, like in an arrow, is to make
the difference between the two extremes of the object, in this case, the universe, and that's all.
Then you can call the extremes future and past, or past and future, or Donald Trump and Joe Biden, or plus and minus on names, names are conventional.
The difference between the two halves of the universe is substantial. This is something that cannot be, I mean, that does not depend on my own names.
So, insist, find an orientation, a direction of time is not to find the place of the future, because the word future is anthropomorphic and completely conventional.
They know it.
May I go ahead, or should I let the new.
Just, just let me.
So, Fede, you have your, you have raised your hands, because you have another question.
No, it's an automatic. Okay.
Karl had other questions, if I'm correct.
Karl.
So, I think that.
But Alvaro wanted to follow up, I think. Yes, if it's a follow up then Alvaro continue and then Karl can make the last question.
Of course, in our universe, there are like, one million criteria for which we can distinguish the two ends of the universe as you said.
So, making, we can look at the scale factor, we can look at matter or we can look at whatever way we want.
But then, I think you want to make this a connection with this and, and there are timing in like in thermodynamics or another.
Okay. Well, this is, this is interesting because this was a part of our original work. Then, this was a point that made a huge price to Castanino and me in a Congress, and so we try to extend this, showing that under certain additional
conditions, in particular, the dominant energy condition, you can transfer, I cannot say that this because it's a little bit technical, but you can transfer this asymmetry to the local,
local regions as an energy flow that points to the same direction in all the space time.
It's not a vector, it's a vector, but doesn't, doesn't matter because it works well in each region of space time, and it points to the same direction, which direction, the direction is conventional.
But the fact is that if you fix in some space, in some point of the space time, the direction of this cell vector, energy cell flow cell vector, that one will point to the same direction all around the space time.
So this connects with the idea that there is something that flows, I mean, a physical magnitude like energy that flows in space time all to the same direction.
I don't want to say future because.
Okay, thank you.
It is very interesting.
Yeah, it's a very nice proposal. I mean, I'm sympathetic in many ways, but in the big literature, the interest in whether there's an arrow of time and how it's connected with physics often has had implicit behind it, the idea that if we understood the arrow of time it would be
explanatory of why there are all these time asymmetric phenomena that we observe around us.
And your approach is really giving up on that as far as I can see, right.
He said, our approach is what gives up on any attempts to make it explanatory of the physical asymmetries in material processes.
No completely just because what I answered recently to Alvaro, if you have, we say, we call the, if you have a time symmetric law, you have two different, always two different solutions one pointing to one side and the other to the other side.
We call them time symmetric twins. The point in the local field in the local regions is how, when you have a time did a time symmetric, a symmetric law, how do you choose one of the twins and discard the others, imagine why you choose retarded solutions in
magnetism and not advanced. Well, when you have the in each point of space time defined an energy flow pointing to one direction, it is pretty easy or reasonable to say, well, I will choose, for instance, retarded
solutions, because they are which the one which carry the energy flow to one direction. And so I am, I can now I, it's legit legitimate to take one of the twins and discard the other.
This is the way and this is something that we also explained in one of the papers how that generic geometrical symmetry is then transferred to the local points as energy flow and that energy flow.
I mean, space time energy flow no point in vectors space time energy flow makes me possible makes me the gives me the tool to retain one of the of the time symmetric twins and discard the other.
And the fact is that since all the energy flow, the energy flow points to the same direction in all the space time this selection of the twins is compact compatible all around the space time.
This is our project. There are problems, there are problems because this needs that I mean the dominant energy condition needs that matter is a positive and normal all around the space time and we know we know that close to singularities you have problems.
This happens with a black holes or warm holes and there are many, many problems we know this is the, these are, I think the problems we have to point to now.
The idea to transfer to the local field, I think that we have some, I mean, we can discuss that but we offered a solution.
Then we can discuss it.
Okay.
I mean, in any case, I have a, I mean, I agree with what Olympia says but I have a different answer because I, and I'm probably going out a limb on here but it's going to true what you say car that usually the problem of their time to explain why we observe, or we why we have experience of time asymmetric reality or pain asymmetric world or whatever.
This is true.
But then, I mean,
I cannot see the link between what we observe, because when we observe, we are in a world where there are, I don't know, non-conservative forces everywhere where we have, I know, a lot of things that are going on that are evidently, for example,
non-time reversal invariant. The classical mechanics that describe the war as we observe it is non-time reversal invariant.
Then you say, well, but at the fundamental level when you just get rid of non-conservative forces, you idealize that the war, say, well, suppose that there are no friction, there is no error in the war, then say the equation is time reversal invariant.
But this is not the war we live in. I mean, the war we observe is a war where this open the time asymmetric, but the physics that describe this war, this particular war is also time asymmetric.
So I don't see really, what is the problem with that, what's the point to say that, well, classical mechanics is time reversal invariant.
Well, yeah, it is time reversal invariant, but for some highly idealized models in which, for example, you don't have non-conservative forces.
But in our war, there are conservative forces. So why we observe time asymmetric war? Well, I mean, the physics itself describes very well why we observe that war.
That's why I think that I wouldn't say that this is the main project, or this should be a part of the project of the era of time, of solving the era of time, of accounting for the era of time.
Again, this is a bit preliminary, and I'm not sure about this, but I don't see the necessity to try to explain, even physically, why we observe what we observe, because what we observe is quite complex.
And in that complexity, obviously the direction of time is there, is evidently there, even if you look at physics.
That's good.
Okay, if there are no other questions, I would like to thank our speakers.
Can I say something final? Well, thank you everybody for hearing us, and I would like to say, Carl, thank you especially, because he's a specialist in this matter of a space time, and that I would like to send you, Carl, some papers.
So we would be very proud to hear your impressions, because it's something that we make, I made some time ago, and I would like to hear your opinions, because I think that your opinions will help us to continue to develop
your opinions and criticism and all that, to continue to develop this project. We are beginning again with a new one.
Okay, that sounds very good. Thanks.
No, thank you, thank you.
I would like to thank you all of you for for hearing me and for hearing us and for all your comments. It was very helpful. So thank you for inviting us again.
Thank you. So, have a nice day. You're in Argentina.
And to the other people, have a nice evening and see you soon in our next video. Bye bye.
Thanks for coming.